Project Gutenberg's La culotte du brigadier, by Florian Pharaon (1827-1887)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: La culotte du brigadier

Author: Florian Pharaon (1827-1887)

Release Date: November 12, 2007 [EBook #23463]

Language: French

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LA CULOTTE DU BRIGADIER ***




Produced by Rénald Lévesque




LA CULOTTE DU BRIGADIER

----

Saint-Maximin est une jolie et coquette petite ville de Province, pleine
de soleil et d'ombrages, célèbre par son église aux allures de
cathédrale et par le souvenir du brigadier Camaréon.

L'épopée de ce brave vétéran des guerres d'Afrique est décrite à la
fresque par quatre grandes pages qui forment la paroi de la salle de la
"Pomme-de-Pin", cabaret qui, il y a trente ans était le grand café de la
bourgeoisie de l'endroit.

Le premier tableau représente un chien en arrêt et dans la pénombre
ombreuse d'un sentier, la silhouette de deux gendarmes; dans le second,
les deux gardiens de la paix publique sont au galop, poursuivis plutôt
que suivis par le chien; le troisième fait assister les spectateurs à un
repas que partage le chien; le quatrième, enfin, une sorte d'apothéose,
nous montre le brigadier son chapeau brossé et carré sur la tête, encore
tout botté, mais, en chemise, et l'arrière-train d'un chien fuyant par
un carreau de papier résolument traversé.

Ces fresques sont signées Lucoli, un peintre qui battait misérablement
la campagne en 1846, et qui possède aujourd'hui un palais à Florence, sa
patrie.

Or, voici l'aventure qu'elles racontent, aventure restée légendaire à
Saint-Maximin, à Puy Loubien, à Trets, et dans toute la vallée de l'Arc,
célèbre par la victoire de Marius et la défaite des Cimbres.

M. Frédéric de Trets était un grand chasseur devant le Seigneur, aussi
fier de la sûreté de son oeil que de son vieux compagnon Faro,
magnifique chien d'arrêt qu'il se faisait gloire d'avoir dressé.

Un soir, il revenait, le carnier plein, de battre la plaine, lorsque au
détour du chemin, il rencontra son voisin Sixte Choua. Sixte Choua était
aussi un chasseur, mais chasseur d'oiseaux de passage, qu'il guettait
nonchalamment de son poste; il avait, en outre pour la plus profonde
aversion les chiens, qui ne sont bons, disait-il, qu'à effaroucher le
gibier et à le mettre en fuite.

M. Frédéric et Sixte Choua se serrèrent la main et firent route vers
Trets. Faro, en chien bien dressé, marchait le nez sur les talons de son
maître.

La conversation ne tarda pas à rouler sur la chasse, et Sixte Choua
reprit sa thèse sur l'inutilité du chien.

M. Frédéric chercha à convaincre son compagnon en lui citant les
prouesses de Faro; mais Sixte Choua avait son opinion faite et n'en
voulait pas démordre. A chaque fait que lui citait M. Frédéric, Sixte
Choua répondait:

--C'est un pur hasard.

M. Frédéric était exaspéré.

--Qu'entends-tu par un pur hasard? s'écria-t-il.

--Oh! rien.

--Mais encore?

--Eh bien, suppose une supposition: tu as la bouche ouverte, je te jette
une cerise entre le nez et le menton; si elle ne tombe pas dans ta
bouche, c'est par un pur hasard.

--Tu es plus entêté que le bedeau de Peynier.

M. Frédéric s'arrêta, fit mine de charger son fusil; Faro, les yeux
fixés sur lui, raidit son fouet.

--Cherche! lui cria-t-il en lui désignant un champ de trèfle qui bordait
la route.

Puis se tournant vers Sixte Choua:

--Tiens, lui dit-il, nous sommes seuls; Faro ne nous voit ni ne nous
entend, n'est-ce pas? Eh bien, regarde: je mets cette pièce de cinq
francs sous cette pierre; nous allons rentrer à Trets, et j'enverrai
Faro la chercher. Tu ne diras pas que c'est un pur hasard, ça?

--Oh! pour ça non; ce ne sera pas un pur hasard.

--Eh bien, partons, dit M. Frédéric.

Il siffla Faro, et ils se dirigèrent vers Trets, où ils arrivèrent à la
nuit tombante.

En attendant le souper que préparait la ménagère, les deux amis
s'assirent sur un banc qu'ombrageait un magnifique figuier et
s'apprêtèrent à pétuner, comme disait M. Frédéric, qui avait la
prétention d'être un beau parleur. Lorsque sa pipe fut bien allumée, il
appela Faro, qui vint se placer entre ses jambes, et il le caressa.

--Tu vois, Faro, dit-il en montrant au chien une pièce de cinq francs,
tu vois! J'en ai perdu une sur le chemin, va la chercher!

Faro donna quelques éclats de voix en bondissant pour indiquer qu'il
avait compris; puis, prenant piste, le nez au ras du sol, il partit en
courant.

--Eh bien, qu'en dis-tu? dit M. Frédéric.

--S'il rapporte la pièce, je dirai que ce n'est pas un pur hasard.

Faro quêta tout le long du chemin et s'arrêta net devant la pierre sous
laquelle était placée la pièce de cinq francs. Il essaya vainement de la
soulever avec son museau; il flairait bruyamment, cherchant une issue
pour atteindre la pièce. Après de vains efforts, il se décida à gratter
le sol pour faire une excavation qui lui permit d'atteindre l'objet
qu'il recherchait.

Il se livrait ardemment à cette besogne sur le bord du sentier, lorsque
deux gendarmes apparurent. Faro était un trop honnête chien pour fuir
devant l'autorité; il considéra même l'arrivée des représentants de la
force publique comme un secours providentiel. Tout frétillant, il
s'élança vers eux, revint vers la pierre, se mit à regratter, retourna,
semblant solliciter leur assistance.

Le brigadier était un homme d'expérience, et, trouvant ce manège
insolite, il mit pied à terre. Le chien ne le quittait pas de vue.
Camaréon--tel était le nom du brigadier,--souleva la pierre et vit une
belle pièce blanche qui, malgré la nuit qui était arrivée, se détachait
brillante sur la terre sombre. Le chien se précipita sur elle, mais le
brigadier l'avait déjà saisie.

--Diable! diable! dit-il, qu'est-ce que cela signifie? Quel est ce
mystère?

Après un moment de réflexion, il mit soigneusement la pièce de cinq
francs dans la poche de son pantalon et remonta à cheval.

Puis, comme la nuit était venue, il partit au trot, suivi de son
subordonné.

Faro, un instant hésitant, étonné peut-être de l'acte d'indélicatesse du
brigadier, prit son parti et se mit à la poursuite des gendarmes.

Tout en chevauchant, son inférieur se hasarda à l'interroger:

--Pour lors, brigadier, que vous pensez que cette pièce...

--Est une pièce à conviction... que c'est à cet endroit même que fut
dévalisé le boucher du Beausset, dont auquel j'ai perdu la piste des
coupables... et qu'avec cette pièce je fais faire un rapport au
capitaine, avec mes idées.

Faro suivait toujours.

--Le chien nous suit, dit le gendarme.

--Tant mieux, que ce sera une pièce à conviction de plus à mettre dans
mon rapport au capitaine.

En arrivant à Saint-Maximin, ils mirent les chevaux à l'écurie et
montèrent souper dans le réfectoire de la caserne.

Faro n'avait pas quitté la botte du gendarme.

On se mit à table, et Faro fut admirablement traité. Camaréon n'avait
jamais vu de chien plus caressant; la tête appuyée sur les genoux du
brigadier, il ne perdait pas un seul de ses mouvements et poussait la
familiarité jusqu'à fourrer son museau dans la poche de sa culotte.

Le repas fini, chacun se retira dans sa chambre, et Camaréon emmena avec
lui Faro.

Je ne vous ferai pas assister à la toilette de nuit d'un brigadier de
gendarmerie; sachez seulement que, à peine Camaréon venant de déposer
négligemment sa culotte sur le dossier d'une chaise, Faro se précipita
dessus, la happa et bondit avec à travers un carreau de papier qui
remplaçait une vitre absente de la fenêtre.

Je ne chercherai pas à vous décrire la stupéfaction de Camaréon. Il
cria: "Au voleur!" Ses hommes accoururent, et, dans le costume
semi-officiel bien représenté par Lucoli, il raconta à ses subordonnés
sa mésaventure.

On battit les rues sombres de Saint-Maximin, au grand émoi des
habitants, mais on ne découvrit pas Faro.

--Couchons-nous, dit philosophiquement le brigadier; ce chien est un
fricoteur et demain tout le monde à cheval, à la recherche de son
propriétaire, qui doit être un fricoteur.

Sur cet ordre, tous les gendarmes allèrent se coucher.

Pendant ce temps-là, Faro brûlait les quatre lieues qui séparent
Saint-Maximin de Trets.

Sixte Choua, attardé quittait M. Frédéric fort inquiet de la longue et
inexplicable absence de Faro, lorsque celui-ci arriva à toute vitesse et
déposa une loque noire aux pieds de son maître.

--_Qu'es aquo?_ s'exclama Sixte Choua.

--_Va sabi djé!_ répondit M. Frédéric.

On transporta la guenille poussiéreuse dans la maison. Faro, tout
haletant, vint se coucher auprès et, la secouant, fit tinter sur le
parquet le contenu de la culotte, toute déchiquetée. M. Frédéric la
fouilla et en retira la pièce de cinq francs.

--Eh bien, qu'est-ce que tu en dis?

--J'en dis... j'en dis... fit en goguenardant Sixte Choua, que c'est un
pur hasard de trouver dans une vieille culotte cinq francs placés sous
une pierre au bord du chemin; voilà un pur hasard. Eh bien! bonsoir.

Sixte Choua allait se retirer, lorsque soudain M. Frédéric se frappa le
front en poussant un grand cri:

--Ah! mon Dieu! quel malheur!

--Quoi donc?

--Tu ne comprends pas? J'ai fait voir à Faro une pièce de cinq francs;
il a mal compris, je lui ai mal expliqué. Il a cru qu'il m'en fallait
une quelconque, et alors...

--Alors?

--Oh! c'est affreux! alors il a rencontré quelqu'un, il l'a attaqué, il
l'a peut-être dévoré pour m'apporter ma pièce, qui n'est pas ma pièce.
Sainte Vierge Marie, quel malheur!

--Allons, du calme, Frédéric, sois un homme, dit Sixte Choua. Voyons
d'abord ce que c'est que cette loque.

Les deux amis ne tardèrent pas à reconnaître le restant d'une culotte de
gendarme.

--Assassiner un gendarme! Quel gueux que ce Faro! s'exclama M. Frédéric,
désespéré.

Sixte Choua ne voulut pas abandonner son voisin, et les deux amis
passèrent une nuit horrible à se consulter. Faro ne comprenait rien aux
gourmades qu'il recevait, et, en philosophe, il alla se coucher dans la
grange pour les éviter.

A l'aube, les deux amis, qui avaient résolu d'aller droit au danger, se
dirigèrent vers la gendarmerie.

A moitié route, à l'endroit même où, la veille, il avait voulu faire sa
malencontreuse expérience, il aperçut un groupe de gendarmes. En les
apercevant, Faro s'était précipité à leur rencontre, et Camaréon l'avait
reconnu. En deux temps de galop, il fut auprès de M. Frédéric.

--Il est à vous, ce chien? fit-il

--Oui, brigadier.

--Et ma culotte?

--La voici, répondit piteusement M. Frédéric en tirant de sa veste un
lambeau de drap.

--Ah! Ah! je vous tiens donc, assassins du boucher du Beausset! dit
Camaréon.

Et mettant pied à terre, il commença l'interrogatoire.

Il ne fut pas difficile de s'expliquer, et gendarmes et inculpés
allèrent dîner chez M. Frédéric.

La culotte fut généreusement payée.

--C'est égal, vous avez là un fameux chien, dit Camaréon.

--Qu'est-ce que je te disais, hein, Sixte?

--Que veux-tu? voilà ce qu'on peut appeler un pur hasard!

FLORIAN PHARAON.
















































































End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of La culotte du brigadier, by 
Florian Pharaon (1827-1887)

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LA CULOTTE DU BRIGADIER ***

***** This file should be named 23463-8.txt or 23463-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/4/6/23463/

Produced by Rénald Lévesque

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
